Drafts for Revision (#1)
eopf-toolkit/eopf-101: 1_about_cloudoptimized_formats.qmd

---
title: "1.1 About Cloud Optimised Formats"
format: html
---

## Why is Cloud Computing Important for Sentinel Data?
For many years, using Earth Observation (EO) data meant downloading large files to the computer. Cloud computing changes this completely by bringing the data and the tools to process it together. This allows for large-scale analysis that wasn't possible before. Now, it is possible to:

- Access huge amounts of Sentinel data on demand.
- Process data much faster using powerful cloud computers (for example, analysing changes across a whole continent over time).
- Exchange results easily with others around the world without needing to physically send files.

## Why are Cloud-Optimised Data formats useful for Sentinel Data?

> The volume of EO data has grown exponentially in recent years. For ESA, Copernicus alone generates ~16TB daily from Sentinel flights. Traditional file formats, like SAFE (where each file can be hundreds of megabytes), make it slow to get just the specific information needed (for example, data for a single city over a decade). It is often needed to download the entire asset, even if only a small part is needed.

Reviewer: Replace `It is often needed to download the entire asset, even if only a small part is needed.` with `We have to download the entire asset, even if only a small part of of it is needed.`

Cloud-optimised formats like Zarr and COG make working with this data much more efficient by allowing:

> - **Subsetting extraction**: Avoiding full downloads (optimised ELT operations).

Reviewer: Please refer to the changes I made earlier in our training Jupyter Hub as well as I've spelled out some of these technical terms.

- **Parallel processing**: by working with many parts of the data at the same time.
- **Scalable storage**: Using cloud-native storage systems that can grow as needed.
- **Optimised data latency**: Reducing delays when processing and visualising data.

> Allowing the users to reduce latency enables faster access for users who don't have powerful computers, making Sentinel data more accessible to everyone, no matter where they are. 

Reviewer 2: I think this should be moved into the section below.

It also allows for more detailed analysis, leading to more accurate results because the analysis can use more relevant data.

## What is Data Latency?

**Data latency** in cloud computing refers to the time it takes for data to be available for processing once requested from cloud storage. For satellite data, this includes the time from when the satellite captures the data to when it is possible to work with it.

> Minimising latency is crucial where delays impact:

Reviewer 2: I'm a bit confused about what this line (31) is trying to say. Is there a typo?

Author: It is trying to say that latency's reduction can benefit in...

> - Faster accessibility for the users

Reviewer: Replace with `We can access the data in less time.`

- Decisions can be made more quickly.

> - Combining and analysing different datasets is more efficient.

Reviewer: Instead of a period, add a comma - `, reducing computing costs.`

Modern cloud architectures reduce latency through:

> - Storing and processing data in different geographic locations (e.g., AWS regions co-located with ESA ground stations)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Storing and processing data in different geographic locations (e.g., cloud provider regions co-located with ESA ground stations)
```

::: {.callout-note}
When accessing data over the internet (e.g., cloud storage), latency is high compared to local storage, so it's preferable to fetch lots of data in fewer reads.
:::

## Cloud Optimised Formats

Initiatives like the [Cloud Native Geospatial Forum (CNG)](https://cloudnativegeo.org/) help develop ways to use geospatial data efficiently in the cloud, using standard cloud technologies and encouraging open collaboration on data formats. Two of the most important formats for storing and accessing geospatial data efficiently are Cloud-Optimised GeoTIFFs (COGs) and Zarr.

### Cloud-optimised GeoTIFF (COG)

COGs are like snapshots of raster data (such as satellite images or elevation maps). This widely used format improves the standard GeoTIFF format by:

- Organising data into **tiles**: Dividing the data into smaller, manageable squares (like 512x512 pixels).
- Including lower-resolution previews: Having pre-generated, less detailed versions of the data.

![Figure _ COG structure. Retrieved from CNG](cogtiff.png)

A key feature is the **Internal File Directory** (IFD), which acts like an internal index. This allows:

> - Retrieve only the parts of the data needed using simple web requests.

Reviewer: Replace `Retrieving` instead of `Retrieve`.

- For example, it is possible to access just the tiles covering Paris from a large Sentinel-2 image of Europe.

### Zarr

This format is designed for handling large, multi-dimensional datasets (often called "data cubes"). Zarr, developed and maintained by the community, works by:

- Storing data as compressed **chunks** in a flexible way.
- Allowing for efficient indexing and processing of the data in parallel.
- Enabling specific descriptions (metadata) for each part of the data.

![Figure _ Zarr structure. Retrieved from CNG.](zarr1.png)

For example, Zarr makes it possible to extract temperature data for the summer of 2023 from a climate dataset spanning 50 years without needing to load the entire dataset.

> A comparison between COGs and Zarr is deployed as:

Reviewer: Replace with `The table below compares some features of COG and Zarr:`

| Feature | Zarr | COG |
|---------|------|-----|
| Structure | Multi-file chunks | Single file |
| Access | Parallel | Sequential |
| Compression | Differently per-chunk | Whole-file |
| Scales | Multi-scale in single file | Separate, pre-generated lower-resolution files |

> ## When to Use COGs? and When to Use Zarr?

Reviewer: Replace with `##When to use COGs versus Zarr?`

Based on the structure and capabilities for each format, it is advised to use COGs when:

> - Working with raster data (like images or elevation models) that doesn't change frequently.

Reviewer: Replace `doesn't` with `do not`
